[AUDIO LOGO]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Egypt-- along the western
bank of the mighty Nile River,
a sprawling pyramid field
dots the sacred sand.
Throughout history, this
region has been known
as the Memphite Necropolis.
Named after the ancient
capital of Egypt, Memphis,
this necropolis, which
translates from ancient Greek
as cemetery or city
of the dead, is
home to the most sophisticated
and highly debated
ancient civilizations
known to man.
The grandiosity, power, and
purpose of these pyramids
have baffled all who
have studied them.
But the mainstream
argument for pyramids
as being strictly burial
tombs is sharply challenged.
What other evidence
does this sacred sand
conceal that could alter the
mainstream timeline for the rise
of human civilizations?
>> The area that is called the
pyramid fields is a mysterious
area that stretches
all the way from Giza,
just outside of Cairo, all
the way down to Dahshur.
This entire area
has pyramids that
remain in different
states of preservation.
Some of them, when you look at
them, look like a mound of earth
because they are
so deteriorated.
And some of them, such
as the ones on Giza,
are very clearly
beautiful pyramids.
>> There are a number of
different pyramid fields
in Egypt.
You have Giza, then a
series of other ones,
including Abusir, Saqqara,
and ending with Dahshur.
So you have to ask yourself, why
are they all on the West Bank?
Why are they not
on the East Bank?
Well, this is because the
ancient Egyptians believed
that the west was the direction
of the dead and the afterlife,
and the east was the direction,
because of the rising
sun, of life and rebirth.
And this whole dualism of
the west representing death,
the east representing life, was
an integral part of everything
the ancient Egyptians did.
>> And Memphis was one of the
major capital cities of ancient
Egypt.
And there's this huge network
in Memphis of the necropolis,
you know, these tunnels
and crypts and this,
you know, very complex
structure of building for both,
I would say, for
rites of initiation,
immersion into the
underworld, as well as
for the burial of the dead,
where the kings and the pharaohs
started to erect their tombs,
their temples, their pyramids.
So there's quite the network of
underworld initiation and burial
that is associated with
the Memphis Necropolis.
>> Roughly eight kilometers or
five miles northwest of the Giza
Plateau sits an anomalous
archaeological site named Abu
Rawash.
This lesser known
location, often referred to
as being the home to the
pharaoh Djedefre's lost pyramid,
contains the remains
of two pyramid bases
and looks down on
the Giza Plateau
from roughly 300 feet
higher above sea level.
The ancient history
of Abu Rawash
appears to be very turbulent
and contains many more questions
than answers.
>> Everybody is aware of Giza.
This is where you
have the three Great
Pyramids there of
Khufu, his son, Khafre,
and his son, Menkaure.
There's a whole
family group here.
But there is a missing
link with all of this,
and that is Abu Rawash.
And when you get there,
you climb a hill,
and all you see in
front of you to start
with is a massive debris field.
It's like some kind of cataclysm
has struck this pyramid
and virtually destroyed it
almost down to the ground.
And you walk amongst
these huge blocks of stone
weighing tons apiece.
And eventually, in
the center of it,
there's this massive pit
with this causeway going down
into it, which is gigantic.
And you look around, and
you wonder what the hell
has gone on here in the past.
I mean, who was Djedefre?
Why did he build here, and
why was his pyramid destroyed?
>> Here is a guy, Djedefre,
who's the second son of King
Khufu, who allegedly
built the Great Pyramid.
His older brother
dies, and now Djedefre
has an opportunity to leave
a monument for eternity.
He would look out at what we
think of as the Giza Plateau
today and see one pyramid,
that belonging to his father.
And you would think
he would want to build
right next to his father.
He'd want to be close
to him for eternity,
but he doesn't do that.
He goes five miles northwest.
He goes to a high ground.
He stands on this high ground,
what is today called Abu Rawash,
and he looks north
into the delta.
You can see all the way
to the Mediterranean.
He looks across the Nile
River, and he sees Heliopolis,
the city of the sun.
He says, I'm going to be
the first pharaoh that's
going to take the name,
Son of Ra, Son of the Sun.
And I'm going to
build my pyramid here.
And it's called
Djedefre's Starry Sky.
And it's a magnificent building,
according to descriptions.
It's made of granite,
but it's got a skin on it
that's made of an alloy of
gold, silver, and copper that
shimmered in the sun.
It had to have just been
absolutely magnificent.
But what's fascinating
about his story
is that he completely abandons
the magnificence of what we see
today in the Pyramid of Khufu.
When he builds his pyramid,
he doesn't build the chambers
on the inside, like
his father did.
He builds them underground.
He doesn't build his
pyramid from scratch.
He builds it on top
of a pile of rubble.
And as time will
tell, his pyramid
disintegrates, either
of its own volition
or it's destroyed, possibly
by some external force
or simply by people coming
and harvesting its stones
to build other complexes.
Today, we're left with the
mystery in these questions of,
why didn't he build
on the Giza Plateau,
like his younger brother did?
Why did he go off to
this mysterious place?
What was it that
prompted him to go there?
>> One of the unusual features
of Abu Rawash is the fact that
when you go to the site
itself, it's rarely visited.
It's a private
access kind of job.
You can't just turn up there.
It looks like the stones are
scattered around the whole area.
This is one thing that
a lot of people notice.
There's granite everywhere.
There's chunks of limestone.
Some of it is beautifully
polished and curved in places.
And it does look like there's
some kind of cataclysm
has hit the site.
We see similar things, though,
on the Giza Plateau as well.
So people are
suggesting that there's
some kind of technology there
that may have went wrong
and actually caused this
kind of destruction.
>> One of the most mysterious
sites that we're finding is Abu
Rawash, and it is a site that
we don't know a lot about
because the truth is, we
don't know who built it.
We don't know when
it was damaged
and when it was destroyed.
What makes it so unique is
that it is a pyramid that's
open to the sky.
What was perhaps
even more interesting
is not far from this pyramid
is a mysterious staircase.
You can only see this staircase
when you're on top of it
because it is carved into
the flat limestone plateau,
and looking across, you would
never see this staircase.
It begins at ground level,
and it goes gradually,
about a 45-degree
angle down 100 feet.
And today, it now
goes into the water
because when the high
dam was built in Egypt,
it backed up the Nile
and the groundwater.
The groundwater has
risen and has actually
flooded many of the
temples throughout Egypt.
So the question is, what
does this staircase lead to?
Who would go through
the trouble to build
this beautiful
staircase that appears
to go nowhere, or at least
into the water, at this time?
This is a staircase built into
a complex that's 22 miles long,
over 4,000 square acres.
And this staircase--
the speculation
is that it is an opening,
it is an entrance that
goes into the tunnels,
into the chambers that
are underneath this plateau,
just as we have staircases
and tunnels that go underneath
Giza, ground-penetrating radar
showing that very clearly.
So who knows what
we're going to find?
I think the pyramid
and the staircase
together are probably
working to tell us
a story, if we can look at
this as a connected system
rather than as isolated
events in our ancient past.
>> Abu Rawash is weird, and I'll
say that because we know so far
that the Nile, being what it
is, a mirror of the Milky Way--
and several of the
pyramids are actually
mirror images of specific stars
and constellations on the Nile.
Well, you have
the Giza pyramids,
which at this specific
moment in time,
according to Bauval and Gilbert,
mirror the constellation
of Orion, 10,400
BC on the equinox.
Well, if you're standing there
at that particular moment,
and you look over this way,
and you look at the night sky,
you'll see that Sirius is
also sitting right next to it,
and it falls right over Iwnw,
or Heliopolis, as it's called
today, which is the Academy.
You go over this
way, and you start
going down to the Red
Pyramid and the Bent Pyramid.
And they basically are mirror
images of the Hyades cluster
in Taurus.
So if you're going
further south,
you end up where
the Pleiades are.
So that leaves us
with Abu Rawash.
It doesn't seem
to match anything.
So now we have a conundrum.
If all the pyramids
were laid out
according to a mirror of
map of the sky at the time,
what is Abu Rawash doing there?
Have we forgotten
something is there,
another element in the sky
that we are familiar with?
>> As the debate around the
date of construction of this
mysterious site continues, the
evidence that this site was
connected to the Memphite
Necropolis is mounting.
But the question remains,
was this potential pyramid
destroyed or dismantled?
>> Let's go with
the first argument.
The pyramids were
built in one go,
so it was part of
a unified plan.
So that means that
Abu Rawash also
would have had to
have been built,
and it has since been destroyed.
And we know that it's true.
So that's option one.
It was a pyramid, and then it's
been systematically taken down
to build the towns around it.
The second option, which I tend
to go with a little bit more,
it's to do with the fact that
the pyramids weren't built
in their entirety early on, that
there was a blueprint laid down,
and Abu Rawash was
part of that blueprint.
And it was stopped
for some reason.
We just don't know
why because there
is a comparative one
at Zawyet El-Aryan,
which is just
probably about also
eight miles further south of
the Great Pyramid of Giza.
So you've got these two
pyramids, which are non-pyramids
or they're destroyed pyramids.
And if you look at the
way that Abu Rawash was
built with a huge
sort of slope down
into the middle of the bedrock
at a certain level of degree,
about 26 degrees, I believe,
fashions out into a T shape,
it's exactly what we
see at Zawyet El-Aryan.
And we know that that
also was interrupted
by some enormous event because
when the sand was dug out
of the pit, we found
all the stones that
were ready to be built
around that hole, which
were deliberately shaped as
part of the interior passages.
The stones have been
dumped into the actual hole
as though they were put
there by this enormous force,
like a wall of water, which
absolutely fits in the idea
that all the pyramids were
built at the same moment
around the time of the flood.
So I very much ascribe
to that particular theory
that Abu Rawash was
part of that plan.
It was a real pyramid.
>> The problems with
Abu Rawash is, one,
that we have this amazing
technology that's going
into Khufu's pyramid.
Admittedly, it was probably
not built by Khufu.
It had been built
at an earlier time,
and Khufu simply tried to do
some sort of restoration on it,
and, therefore, his
name is attached to it.
But the fact that his
successor couldn't even
complete the pyramid
that he tried to build
suggests that the technology
was lost somewhere.
Indications are it
was either taken apart
or it was blown apart.
So that means Djedefre, whose
name literally means "the power
of the djed," which represented
the spinal column of Osiris,
he probably did not
build this pyramid.
It was part of the
bigger network that
was being built in antiquity.
If anything, he
tried to restore it
and wasn't able to restore it.
>> As the relics from this perch
above Giza continue to puzzle
alternative researchers, a
clue, left to us from an Italian
cartographer, may spark a new
debate on an unsolved ancient
legend.
>> I was in Florence and had the
opportunity to visit the Galileo
Museum.
It's an amazing place.
And one of the artifacts
that was in there that caught
my attention was a map
titled The Fra Mauro Map,
by a cartographer
from the 15th century.
He was Italian,
and he'd actually
taken the painstaking
effort to draw out
every aspect of the known
world at that time, since 1457.
One of the first places I went
to as I looked at this map
is I looked straight for Egypt.
So I looked for the
Nile River, but I was
unable to find the Nile River.
It was under a different name,
listed as a river named Gihon.
I immediately thought, why would
he have named the river Gihon?
Gihon is a reference to
the Bible in Genesis.
The place where the four rivers
meet is the Garden of Eden,
and the four rivers are supposed
to be the Tigris, Euphrates,
the Gihon River, and
the Pishon River.
Why was the Gihon listed
as the Nile River?
I also noticed that the Giza
Plateau had five pyramids on it,
not three.
This and many other questions
led me to investigate this,
and what I found
has the potential
to dramatically shift
how we perceive and see
all the sites of Egypt versus
the Mesopotamian sites.
And, in particular, it pointed
directly to the word, Babylonia,
which I'd recognized
because Babylon
is the old name for Cairo.
In fact, today it's even marked
by the Fortress of Babylon,
which is not far to
the northwest of Giza.
As I look more deeply into
this subject of Babylonia,
I noticed that eight kilometers
northwest of the Giza Plateau
is a very enigmatic place
that sits immediately
to the west of what we
would consider old Babylon.
This is another
pyramid complex that
has two pyramids that have been
partially destroyed, flattened,
as it were.
They sit high atop a
plateau, both pyramids being
made of the very expensive
and difficult to quarry rose
granite that comes
all the way from Aswan
a full 800 kilometers away.
That's a lot of
effort to undertake.
As we look around the
Abu Rawash plateau today,
we'll find the strewn
blocks, literally hundreds
of meters, many of them 10 to
15 or even 20 tons in weight,
that have been tossed hundreds
of meters from the center point
to where those blocks sit today.
This is a really enigmatic place
that requires a lot more study.
And given its reference directly
across along the Gihon River
matching with Babylon,
I couldn't help
but ask myself the
question, might there
be more to this story
yet to be unfolded?
The Djedefre satellite pyramid
would have stood at 103.7ft
high, but because it sits 300
feet higher in elevation than
the Giza Plateau and because
of its very steep architecture,
it would have appeared to
tower over the Giza Plateau.
The Great Pyramid is 481
feet, but the Djed Pyramid
that is immediately behind
the Djedefre satellite
would have stood
about 600 feet high
when compared with the same
elevation with the Giza Plateau.
This would have,
by far, looked as
though it would have
been the tallest
building in all of the land.
It could have seen, very likely,
for many, many tens of miles
in distance from both
the Giza Plateau,
as well as from Abu Rawash.
What did these
pyramids represent?
And their construction--
why was it made out
of the most expensive
rose quartz granite
that is only found in the
sarcophagus in the King's
Chamber?
Because of its expense.
Both of these pyramids
had casing stones that
were entirely rose granite.
Crystalline pyramids-- both of
these pyramids somehow exploded.
How did those blocks
get so far away,
weighing 10, 20, even 30 tons?
We only have more
and more questions
related to what the exact
purpose was of this plateau
high upon this hilltop.
What was the meaning
of these pyramids,
and why do we have
no reference to them
throughout any of our history?
Now, this Abu Rawash pyramid,
because it has an 86.4-foot base
width, means that its height
would have been 103.7 feet high,
and then a 60-degree
pyramid, slope angle,
immediately adjacent
to it, to the diagonal.
And what you find there is that
that pyramid with a 60-degree
angle would have stood
approximately 300 feet high from
the plateau with the plateau
being 300 feet higher than
the Giza Plateau, referencing
a pyramid that would have been
approximately 600 feet high
with a super steep slope angle.
It would have definitely
left an imposing feeling
on anybody looking at it
from the Giza Plateau.
And maybe the
reference is something
that's closer to heaven.
The base of the Djedefre
satellite pyramid,
86-feet-point-four,
So 86.4 feet,
which references 86,400
seconds in one day.
Is this telling us something
about the relationship
of the arc of time?
As I started to look at this
and imagine standing on the Giza
Plateau, if I looked up to look
at these foreboding structures,
crystalline pyramids
high upon this hilltop,
far off in the distance
having a pink granite hue,
I started to ask, might
there be any reference
historically to these pyramids?
And I could only
find one location.
These extraordinarily
tall structures
might be a direct reference to
the story of the Tower of Babel.
I also noted that the
relationship to Babylon,
as well as the
relationship, as mentioned
in the Bible in the Genesis
account in chapter 10,
where we noticed that this
structure of the Tower of Babel
was supposed to have been built
next to the Gihon River, which
also is where Babylon
would have been found,
or Babylonia, as we find
on the Fra Mauro Map.
I couldn't help but ask
myself the question, given
the age and the large
block construction,
might this location
of Abu Rawash actually
have been the place where
Nimrod, the son of Kush,
would have built
these two pyramid
structures to represent
the Tower of Babel,
an ascent back into heaven?
As we dive more deeply into the
biblical account in Genesis,
chapter 10, we see that
Nimrod, the builder
of the Tower of Babel, which
is where the languages were
supposedly confounded, was the
son of a very famous person
by the name of Kush, who was the
grandson of Noah, Noah of Noah's
Ark.
Nimrod was known as
the Great Hunter.
Notice also the reference to
the Great Hunter of Orion.
Nimrod, being the
son of Kush, would
have come from where
the Kushite people came.
And in the Bible, it
actually references as well
that the River Gihon goes into
and flows into the place of Kush
because Gihon actually
means gushing water.
The word "gush" or "kush"
is from this derivative.
So, therefore, as we look at
the place where this river came
from in Southern Egypt, we then
must ask ourselves the question,
is it more likely that
the Kushite people that
are referenced in the Bible were
in the ancient land of Kemet?
And, in fact, I could find
no reference in contrast
to the people of Kush ever
having visited Mesopotamia.
So if we take the biblical
account at face value,
and also that Josephus
and the Nile River
was known anciently
as the Gihon River,
we must consider Abu Rawash
as a potential location
for the ancient Tower of Babel.
>> The story of the Tower of
Babel is very interesting,
especially concerning the
origin of human languages.
But let's explore this notion
that the Babylon we know of
is a replica city
of something that
existed far earlier, a city
that we now know as Cairo.
And what if the Tower of Babel
was there, and it was destroyed?
How would that affect our
understanding of human history?
The ramifications of changing
the original location
of the city of Babylon
are incomprehensible.
It would rewrite history books.
It would change mainstream
understanding of human history,
and it would change what we
know about human language.
Prior to the Younger
Dryas incident,
there seems to be the
suggestion that there
was a worldwide network
going on and that there
were certain areas, particularly
like this area in Egypt,
but also at Teotihuacan
in Mexico and Xi'an
in China, where
they were building
these pyramids for a
very specific purpose.
And we know they're all
related by the measurements
of their bases
and their heights.
And it's very
clear they were all
based on the megalithic yard.
And so there was a
connection between them all.
So ultimately, that whole
region where these pyramids
were being built, these
pyramids were literally
meant to be towers
to reach the heavens.
Even if we look at them as
stargates, that's really
what a stargate is, right?
You're creating a tower
to reach the heavens.
And they were all working
with each other, which
means they all had enough
of a similar language
to be able to do this.
And then after the cataclysm,
everyone got separated.
Languages started to
develop separately.
And this is very much in line
with that Tower of Babel story.
It's quite possible that
this region of Egypt
was the main source
of this story
and that later researchers
began to realize that
and pointed to this
being the true Babylon.
>> When we look
across the plains,
we see above the ground is
only a fraction of the secrets
and the mystery under our feet.
What the science
is telling us today
is that when we
look at Abu Rawash,
the mysteries that we
know exist will only
continue to unfold in
future generations.
Abu Rawash tells us that
something happened in this place
a long time ago,
something important,
and it was worth the time
and the energy of the people
at that time to
build the pyramid,
to build that staircase.
The fact that so little
is understood in this area
tells us that what
is under our feet
is probably
undisturbed, pristine,
and may open the door to
even deeper understandings
of our relationship
to the cosmos
as we begin to understand our
relationship to Abu Rawash.
>> As the mysteries mount from
the western banks of the Nile,
what other evidence will be
revealed to expose the vast
underbelly of this legendary
necropolis and alter
the mainstream timeline for the
rise of human civilizations?